@node External Protocols
@chapter External Protocols

This chapter describes protocols that clients of @sysname{} can use.  As
described in the introduction of section @ref{Concepts} and
@ref{fig:analyzer}, the main activities of clients are on the one hand
updating the @termref{cache} via the @termref{analyzer} and on the other
hand querying and working with parse results, that is
@termrefl{wad,wads}.  Accordingly, the first two sections of this
chapter describe protocols for working with wads while the remaining
sections focus on updating and querying the cache.

@menu
* Package Structure::
* Thread Safety::
* Token Protocol and Classes::
* WAD Protocols and Classes::
* The Associated Buffer Protocol::
* The Cache Protocol::
* The Analyzer Protocol::
@end menu

@node Package Structure
@section Package Structure

All symbols that are relevant to external protocols are in the package
named @t{@toppackage{}}.  We recommend against client code @emph{using}
this package in the sense of the @code{:use} option to
@speclink{f,defpackage} or in the sense of calling
@speclink{f,use-package}.  The reason for this recommendation is that we
can not guarantee that future additions to this library will not define
external symbols that conflict with symbols in the @t{common-lisp}
package or symbols used by the client for other purposes.

Instead, we recommend that client code use explicit package prefixes,
possibly in combination with package-local nicknames.  In addition to
avoiding future conflicts, this practice will make the origin of the
respective symbol obvious from the source code.

@node Thread Safety
@section Thread Safety

Operations in @sysname{} are in general not safe to perform concurrently
when the operations either directly involve a common object or the
involved objects are (directly or indirectly) attached to a common
object.  An example of the latter case would be concurrent operations on
a buffer and the cache associated with the buffer via an analyzer (See
@ref{fig:analyzer} for the concepts and their relations).  Put
differently, concurrent operations are safe on unrelated
buffer--analyzer--cache triples.  When the client obeys certain
restrictions, it is possible to operate on a buffer and the associated
cache concurrently.

@node Token Protocol and Classes
@section Token Protocol and Classes

As mentioned in @ref{Parsing using the Common Lisp Reader}, for some
tokens in the buffer content such as symbols, the corresponding
representation in the @t{raw} slot of the containing wad is not simply a
@commonlisp{} object of the appropriate type but instead an instance of
some token class.  These token objects have two purposes:

@itemize

@item
In case of symbols, represent symbols without modifying the package
system.

@item
Store information about the ``spelling'' (use of package prefixes and
package markers, radix for numbers) that are not part of the
@commonlisp{} objects that the standard reader produces.

@end itemize

This section describes token classes and readers.

@include generated-token-class-hierarchy.texi

@defclassa{token,@toppackage{}}

Superclass for all token classes.
@end deftp

@defclassa{symbol-token,@toppackage{}}

Instances of subclasses of this class represent symbol tokens in the
buffer content including some information about the concrete
``spelling''.
@end deftp

The following readers can be applied to objects of type
@classref{symbol-token,@toppackage{}}:

@defgena{package-name,@toppackage{}} symbol-token

Return @t{nil} or a string that is the name of the package of the symbol
to which @var{symbol-token} refers.  The value @t{nil} is returned if
@var{symbol-token} represents an uninterned symbol.

@quotation Warning
This function will be probably change when @sysname{} transitions to a
more complete model of the package system.
@end quotation
@end deffn

@defgena{name,@toppackage{}} symbol-token

Return a string that is the name of the symbol to which
@var{symbol-token} refers.

@quotation Warning
This function will be probably change when @sysname{} transitions to a
more complete model of the package system.
@end quotation
@end deffn

@defgena{package-marker-1,@toppackage{}} symbol-token

Return @t{nil} or the offset of the first package marker character
within the item sequence from which @var{symbol-token} has been read.
@end deffn

@defgena{package-marker-2,@toppackage{}} symbol-token

Return @t{nil} or the offset of the second package marker character
within the item sequence from which @var{symbol-token} has been read.
@end deffn

@defclassa{uninterned-symbol-token,@toppackage{}}

Instances of this classes represent symbols that do not have a home
package.
@end deftp

@defclassa{interned-symbol-token,@toppackage{}}

Instances of this classes represent symbols that have a home package.
@end deftp

@defclassa{existing-symbol-token,@toppackage{}}

Instances of this classes represent symbols that exist in the
environment.
@end deftp

@defclassa{non-existing-package-symbol-token,@toppackage{}}

Instances of this classes represent symbols for which the specified
package does not exist in the environment.
@end deftp

@defclassa{non-existing-symbol-token,@toppackage{}}

Instances of this classes represent symbols that do not exist in the
environment.
@end deftp

@node WAD Protocols and Classes
@section WAD Protocols and Classes

@cindex wad
@sysname{} provides various generic functions for working with
@termrefl{wad,wads}.  Those generic functions are organized into
multiple separate protocols for better coherence.  Each of the
subsections of this section describes one such protocol.  The @ref{Wad
Classes,final subsection} describes the wad classes to which the
protocols can be applied.

@menu
* Children Protocol::
* Family Relations Protocol::
* Basic Wad Protocol::
* Wad Protocol::
* Wad Classes::
@end menu

@node Children Protocol
@subsection Children Protocol

This protocol allows the client to process or obtain the children of a
given @termref{wad}.  The children of a wad are also wads.

Note that the sequence of (wad) children considered by the functions in
this section is often different from the (CST) children obtained via the
readers @t{cst:first} and @t{cst:rest} for several reasons
(@pxref{Concrete Syntax Tree Representation}):

@itemize

@item
CST children may not have an associated source location such as the
second @t{cons} in @t{(1 2)} while wads always have a source location.

@item
A CST child may be linked to its parent via multiple relations such as
the string @t{"a"} which is the @t{cst:first} and @t{cst:second} of its
parent in @t{(#1="a" . #1#)}.  In contrast, a wad child must appear
exactly once in the sequence of children of its parent.

@item
Skipped material such as comments does not have a representation as a
CST node at all.  For the wad tree however, comments and other skipped
material appear as children or top-level nodes.

@item
The hierarchy and order of CST nodes may differ from the source text due
to rearrangement by reader macros.  In contrast, for the wad tree
structure, hierarchy corresponds to containment of text regions and the
order of child nodes corresponds to the order of their text regions.

@end itemize

@defgena{map-children,@toppackage{}} function wad

Call @var{function} with each child of @var{wad} as the sole argument.

The calls happen in the order in which the children of @var{wad} appear
in the source text.

The return value of this function is not specified.
@end deffn

@defgena{children,@toppackage{}} wad

Return a fresh list which contains the children of @var{wad}.

The order of the elements in the returned list is the order in which the
children of @var{wad} appear in the source text.
@end deffn

@node Family Relations Protocol
@subsection Family Relations Protocol

@defgena{parent,@toppackage{}} wad

Return the parent wad of @var{wad} or @t{nil} if @var{wad} is a
@termref{top-level wad}.
@end deffn

@defgena{left-sibling,@toppackage{}} wad

Return the wad that is the left sibling of @var{wad} or @t{nil} if
@var{wad} does not have a left sibling.

There are two possible cases in which @var{wad} does not have a left
sibling:

@itemize

@item
If @var{wad} is the first child of its parent.

@item
If @var{wad} is a @termref{top-level wad} and is the first element of
the @termref{prefix}.

@end itemize
@end deffn

@defgena{right-sibling,@toppackage{}} wad

Return the wad that is the right sibling of @var{wad} or @t{nil} if
@var{wad} does not have a right sibling.

There are two possible cases in which @var{wad} does not have a right
sibling:

@itemize

@item
If @var{wad} is the last child of its parent.

@item
If @var{wad} is a @termref{top-level wad} and is the last element of the
@termref{suffix}.

@end itemize
@end deffn

@node Basic Wad Protocol
@subsection Basic Wad Protocol

The section describes the basic wad protocol which is applicable to all
wad-like objects including instances of
@classref{error-wad,@toppackage{}} and
@classref{text-wad,@toppackage{}}.

@defgena{absolute-start-line,@toppackage{}} wad

Return a non-negative integer that is the absolute start line number of
@var{wad}.

@quotation warning
An absolute start line number may not be available, for example if
@var{wad} is a member of the @termref{suffix} of the @termref{cache}.
@end quotation
@end deffn

@defgena{height,@toppackage{}} wad

Return a non-negative integer that is the difference between the end
line number and the start line number of @var{wad}.
@end deffn

@defgena{end-line,@toppackage{}} wad

Return a non-negative integer that is the absolute end line number of
@var{wad}.

@quotation warning
The absolute end line number is available only if @var{wad} is
@termref{absolute}.
@end quotation
@end deffn

@defgena{start-column,@toppackage{}} wad

Return a non-negative integer that is the position of the
@termref{initial character} within the start line of @var{wad}.
@end deffn

@defgena{end-column,@toppackage{}} wad

Return a non-negative integer that is the position of the @termref{final
character} within the end line of @var{wad}.
@end deffn

@defgena{items,@toppackage{}} wad

Return the sequence of buffer items which belong to @var{wad}.

@quotation warning
The sequence of buffer items can be obtained only if the absolute start
line number of @var{wad} is available.
@end quotation
@end deffn

@node Wad Protocol
@subsection Wad Protocol

The section describes the wad protocol which is applicable to all proper
wad objects but not wad-like objects such as instances of @t{error-wad}
and @classref{word-wad,@toppackage{}}.

@defgena{errors,@toppackage{}} wad

Return a list of errors that are associated with @var{wad}.

The elements of the returned list of instances of
@classref{error-wad,@toppackage{}}.
@end deffn

@defgena{indentation,@toppackage{}} wad
@end deffn

@node Wad Classes
@subsection Wad Classes

The following diagram illustrates the hierarchy of wad classes which
@sysname{} provides:

@include generated-wad-class-hierarchy.texi

Instances of subclasses of @classref{basic-wad,@toppackage{}} can be
used with the @ref{Children Protocol}, the @ref{Family Relations
Protocol} and the @ref{Basic Wad Protocol}.  Instances of subclasses of
@t{wad} can additionally be used with the @ref{Wad Protocol}.

@defclassa{basic-wad,@toppackage{}}

Superclass for wad-like classes.  Not intended for use by clients at the
moment.
@end deftp

@defclassa{wad,@toppackage{}}

Superclass for wad classes.
@end deftp

@defclassa{conditional-wad,@toppackage{}}

Instances of subclasses of this class represent four different kinds of
read-time conditional expressions which consist of a ``positive'' or
``negative'' feature expression followed by a guarded expression.

The direct subclass @classref{read-conditional-wad,@toppackage{}} is
also a subclass of @classref{cst-wad,@toppackage{}}.  Instances of its
subclasses and represent read-time conditionals that were @emph{read}
(as opposed to skipped) due to the respective feature expression.

The direct subclass @classref{skipped-conditional-wad,@toppackage{}} is
also a subclass of @classref{skipped-wad,@toppackage{}}.  Instances of
its subclasses and represent read-time conditionals that were
@emph{skipped} (as opposed to read) due to the respective feature
expression.
@end deftp

@defgena{feature-expression,@toppackage{}} sharpsign-wad

Return the feature expression of @var{sharpsign-wad}.
@end deffn

@defclassa{cst-wad,@toppackage{}}

Superclass for wad classes that are also subclasses of
@t{concrete-syntax-tree:cst}.
@end deftp

@defclassa{atom-wad,@toppackage{}}

Instances of this class are wads and atom CST nodes at the same time.

The reader @t{concrete-syntax-tree:raw} returns the raw atom expression.
@end deftp

@defclassa{cons-wad,@toppackage{}}

Instances of this class are wads and cons CST nodes at the same time.

The reader @t{concrete-syntax-tree:raw} returns the raw cons expression.
The readers @t{concrete-syntax-tree:first} and
@t{concrete-syntax-tree:rest} return the CST children.

Note that the CST children and wad children are usually distinct but not
disjoint sets.  That is, usually some but not all CST children are also
wad children and the other way around
(@pxref{Concrete Syntax Tree Representation} and @ref{Children Protocol}
for details).
@end deftp

@defclassa{labeled-object-wad,@toppackage{}}

Instances of subclasses of this class represent labeled object
definitions and references which are usually written using the
@t{#@var{N}=} and @t{#@var{N}#} reader macros.
@end deftp

@defclassa{labeled-object-definition-wad,@toppackage{}}

Instances of this class represent labeled object definitions which are
usually written using the @t{#@var{N}=} reader macro.
@end deftp

@defclassa{labeled-object-reference-wad,@toppackage{}}

Instances of this class represent labeled object references which are
usually written using the @t{#@var{N}#} reader macro.
@end deftp

@defclassa{read-conditional-wad,@toppackage{}}

Instances of subclasses of this class represent a read-time conditional
expression for which the guarded sub-expression was @emph{read} (as
opposed to skipped).  Instances consist of a feature expression and
potentially a subsequent expression.

See @classref{skipped-conditional-wad,@toppackage{}} and its subclasses
for the representation of the opposite case, that is the guarded
expression was @emph{skipped}.
@end deftp

@defclassa{read-positive-conditional-wad,@toppackage{}}

Instances of this class represent a read-time condition expression with
a @t{#+} feature expression and a guarded expression that was
@emph{read} (as opposed to skipped).  In other words, the feature
expression must have evaluated to @emph{true}.
@end deftp

@defclassa{read-negative-conditional-wad,@toppackage{}}

Instances of this class represent a read-time condition expression with
a @t{#-} feature expression and a guarded expression that was
@emph{read} (as opposed to skipped).  In other words, the feature
expression must have evaluated to @emph{false}.
@end deftp

@defclassa{non-cst-wad,@toppackage{}}

Superclass for wad classes that are not sublcasses of
@t{concrete-syntax-tree:cst}.  Objects that are instances of subclasses
of this class mostly represent ``skipped material'' such as comments and
expressions that the reader ignored.
@end deftp

@defclassa{skipped-wad,@toppackage{}}

Superclass of wad classes that represent ``skipped material'' such as
comments and expressions that the reader ignored.
@end deftp

@defclassa{ignored-wad,@toppackage{}}

Superclass of wad classes that represent expressions that the reader
ignored.
@end deftp

@defclassa{reader-macro-wad,@toppackage{}}

Instances of this class represent material that was skipped because the
reader encountered an unknown or invalid reader macro.
@end deftp

@defclassa{read-suppress-wad,@toppackage{}}

Instances of this class represent material that was skipped because
@speclinkl{v,read-suppress,cl:*read-suppress*} was true.
@end deftp

@defclassa{skipped-conditional-wad,@toppackage{}}

Instances of subclasses of this class represent a read-time conditional
expression for which the guarded sub-expression was @emph{skipped} (as
opposed to read).  Instances consist of a feature expression and
potentially a subsequent skipped expression.

See @classref{read-conditional-wad,@toppackage{}} and its subclasses
for the representation of the opposite case, that is the guarded
expression was @emph{read}.
@end deftp

@defclassa{skipped-positive-conditional-wad,@toppackage{}}

Instances of this class represent skipped material that consists of a
@t{#+} feature expression and potentially a skipped subsequent
expression.  In other words, the feature expression must have evaluated
to @emph{false}.
@end deftp

@defclassa{skipped-negative-conditional-wad,@toppackage{}}

Instances of this class represent skipped material that consists of a
@t{#-} feature expression and potentially a skipped subsequent
expression.  In other words, the feature expression must have evaluated
to @emph{true}.
@end deftp

@defclassa{comment-wad,@toppackage{}}

Instances of subclasses of this class represent comments in the source
text.
@end deftp

@defclassa{block-comment-wad,@toppackage{}}

Instances of this class represent a @commonlisp{} block comment which
has the syntax @t{#|...|#} when the reader operates in its default
configuration.
@end deftp

@defclassa{semicolon-comment-wad,@toppackage{}}

Instances of this class represent a @commonlisp{} line comment which has
the syntax @t{;...} when the reader operates in its default
configuration.
@end deftp

@defgena{semicolon-count,@toppackage{}} semicolon-comment-wad

This reader returns the number of @t{#\;} characters@footnote{Or other
line comment initiating characters, depending on the readtable.} at the
beginning of @var{semicolon-comment-wad}.
@end deffn

@defclassa{text-wad,@toppackage{}}

Instances of this class and its subclasses represent text chunks such as
words within comments, strings or symbol names.
@end deftp

@defclassa{punctuation-wad,@toppackage{}}

Instances of this class represent punctuation characters within comments,
strings or symbol names.
@end deftp

@defclassa{word-wad,@toppackage{}}

Instances of this class represent words within comments, strings or
symbol names.
@end deftp

@defgena{misspelled,@toppackage{}} word-wad

Return true if @var{word-wad} contains a spelling error.
@end deffn

@defclassa{error-wad,@toppackage{}}

Instances of this class encapsulate errors that occurred during the
processing of buffer content.

The location information of instances corresponds to that of the
encapsulated error conditions.
@end deftp

@defgena{condition,@toppackage{}} error-wad

Return the encapsulated condition of @var{error-wad}.

The returned object is of type @speclink{t,condition}, usually of type
@speclink{t,error} or @speclink{t,warning}.
@end deffn

@node The Associated Buffer Protocol
@section The Associated Buffer Protocol

This tiny protocol consists of a single generic function which looks up
the @bufferlibrary{} buffer associated with a given object.  Clients can
use this protocol for looking up the buffers associated with @t{cache}
and @classref{analyzer,@toppackage{}} objects.

@defgena{buffer,@toppackage{}} object

Return the @bufferlibrary{} buffer associated with @var{object}.
@end deffn

@node The Cache Protocol
@section The Cache Protocol

@cindex cache
This protocol extends the
@ref{The Associated Buffer Protocol,associated buffer protocol},
that is, the @genref{buffer,@toppackage{}} is applicable to objects
which implement the cache protocol.

@defgena{time-stamp,@toppackage{}} cache

@cindex time stamp (of buffer)
@cindex time stamp (of cache)
Return @t{nil} or an integer time stamp which indicates the most recent
time stamp of the associated buffer for which the cache has been
synchronized to the contents of the buffer.
@end deffn

@defgena{line-count,@toppackage{}} cache

Return the number of lines in @var{cache}.

The returned number reflects the state of the associated buffer at the
time returned by the @genref{time-stamp,@toppackage{}} reader for
@var{cache}, not necessarily the current state.
@end deffn

@defgena{line-length,@toppackage{}} cache line-number

Return the number of items in the line with number @var{line-number}
within @var{cache}.

The returned number reflects the state of the associated buffer at the
time returned by the @genref{time-stamp,@toppackage{}} reader for
@var{cache}, not necessarily the current state.
@end deffn

@defgena{line-contents,@toppackage{}} cache line-number

Return the contents of the line with number @var{line-number} within
@var{cache} as a @speclink{t,vector} if items.

The returned items reflect the state of the associated buffer at the
time returned by the @genref{time-stamp,@toppackage{}} reader for
@var{cache}, not necessarily the current state.
@end deffn

@defgena{find-wad-beginning-line,@toppackage{}} cache line-number

Return the wad in @var{cache} the @termref{initial character} of which
has the minimal item number within @var{line-number} or @t{nil}.
@end deffn

@defgena{find-wads-containing-position,@toppackage{}} cache@
  line-number column-number @pkey{} start-relation end-relation

Return a list of pairs of the form @t{(@var{n} . @var{wad})} where
@var{wad} is a wad, and @var{n} is the absolute start line number of
@var{wad}, such that all the wads are in @var{cache} and contain the
location defined by @var{line-number} and @var{column-number}.  The list
is ordered from the innermost wad containing the location to the
top-level wad containing the location.  The empty list is returned if
the position is not inside any wad.

Each of @var{start-relation} and @var{end-relation} which must be either
the symbol @t{cl:<} or the symbol @t{cl:<=} select the respective
relation for comparisons of locations.  @var{start-relation} controls
how the start location of candidate wads is compared to the location
defined by @var{line-number} and @var{column-number}.
@var{end-relation} controls the comparison for the end location of
candidate wads.
@end deffn

@defgena{map-wads-containing-position,@toppackage{}} function@
  cache line-number column-number @pkey{} start-relation end-relation

Call @var{function} once for each wad in @var{cache} that contains the
location defined by @var{line-number} and @var{column-number}.  The
function calls happen in the order from the innermost wad containing
the location to the top-level wad containing the location.

Each of @var{start-relation} and @var{end-relation} which must be either
the symbol @t{cl:<} or the symbol @t{cl:<=} select the respective
relation for comparisons of locations.  @var{start-relation} controls
how the start location of candidate wads is compared to the location
defined by @var{line-number} and @var{column-number}.
@var{end-relation} controls the comparison for the end location of
candidate wads.
@end deffn

@node The Analyzer Protocol
@section The Analyzer Protocol

@cindex analyzer
This protocol extends the
@ref{The Associated Buffer Protocol,associated buffer protocol}, that
is, the @genref{buffer,@toppackage{}} is applicable to objects which
implement the analyzer protocol.

@defgena{cache,@toppackage{}} analyzer

Return the cache associated with @var{analyzer}.
@end deffn

@defgena{update,@toppackage{}} analyzer

Update the cache associated with @var{analyzer} according to changes in
the buffer associated with @var{analyzer}.

The function does not return a meaningful result.  Instead, the client
queries the updated cache associated with @var{analyzer} after the
update is complete.
@end deffn

@defclassa{analyzer,@toppackage{}}

Instances of this class and potential subclasses implement the analyzer
protocol by tying together three aspects:

@itemize

@item
The analyzer instance consumes the content of an associated
@bufferlibrary{} buffer.

@item
The analyzer implements the behavior of a @commonlisp{} stream which
enables the @eclector{}-based reader to read expressions from the
analyzer.

@item
The analyzer maintains the results of reading from the stream in an
associated cache of parse results (@pxref{Parse Results}).

@end itemize

See @ref{fig:analyzer} and @ref{The Analyzer} for an overview of the
different components and their relations.
@end deftp
